+++
title = "A Survey of Differential-Algebraic Equations"
hascode = true
date = Date(2021, 3, 19)
rss = "We will introduce characterizations, numerical treatments, and structural
analysis/transformation algorithms of differential-algebraic equations in this
post."
+++

@def tags = ["math", "differential equations"]

# A Survey of Differential-Algebraic Equations

## Motivation

We know that the general form of an ODE system is $u'(t) = f(u(t), p, t)$ where
- $f$ is called the derivative function or the RHS of the ODE
- $u$ are called the dependent variable or the states.
- $p$ are the parameters.
- $t$ is the independent variable.

In a Freshman Differential Equations course you will learn [a bag of tricks]
(https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/classes/de/de.aspx) to rearrange such equations
to analytically solve them, i.e. to find the formula for $u(t)$ given $u(0)$.
However, most of the ODEs are impossible to solve analytically, so in practice,
we solve ODEs numerically. This means that we come up with some iterative
procedure that approximates the function $u(t)$ over time starting from $u(0)$.

The basic idea behind all numerical solvers is to arrange terms in a particular
way to truncate the Taylor expansion. For instance,
$$
u(t + h) = u(t) + h u'(t) + O(h^2) = u(t) + h f(t) + O(h^2)
$$
is the famous Euler method.

In engineering, it's often very hard to construct the right hand side of the ODE
explicitly. For instance, in a circuit, we know that the change of voltage is
the current over the capacitance, i.e. $\dd{V}{t} = I(t) / C$. Also, the circuit
follows the Kirchhoff laws which are a system of linear equations. Hence, the
governing system of equations of a RC circuit can be written as a system with
both differential equations and algebraic equations. We also want to compose
different components together to build a larger model, and connection equations
are also purely algebraic. It's possible to reduce algebraic equations away so
that we are only left with explicit differential equations. However, this
process is extremely time consuming and error-prone. Therefore, we want to use
algorithms to automate the simplification and simulation of
differential-algebraic equations (DAEs).

# DAE characterizations
DAEs in essence are ODEs with algebraic relations, so numerical solves expect
DAEs to be in the form of

$$ F(u'(t), u(t), p, t) = 0, $$

where $F: (\R^n, \R^n, \R^m, \R) \mapsto \R^n$.

We know there must be exactly $n$ unknown variables to make the Jacobian of $F$
fully ranked, so that Newton method can be used. Intuitively, we can see that
that only the highest derivative variables change the dynamics (try to convince
yourself using proof by contradiction). Therefore, they are the unknowns.
Let's make this more explicit. There are two possibilities; an unknown $z$ is
differentiated ($z\in u'$) or not differentiated ($z\in u$). We can group
them as
\begin{align}
u = \begin{pmatrix}
u_d\\
u_a\\
\; \\
\;
\end{pmatrix},\quad
u' = \begin{pmatrix}
u'_d \\
\; \\
\lambda \\
\mu'
\end{pmatrix},
\end{align}

Let's use the pendulum system ($P$) in Cartesian coordinate $(x, y)$ as an
example.

\begin{align}
x''(t) - T(t) x(t)       &= 0\\
y''(t) - T(t) y(t) - g   &= 0\\
x(t)^2 + y(t)^2 - L^2    &= 0.
\end{align}

where $T$ is the tension from the string, $g$ is the gravitational acceleration,
$L$ is the length of the string. Since only the highest order derivative terms
determine the dynamics, we can characterize the variables using the order of its
highest derivative. In this case, the highest order derivative terms are $x'',
y''$, and $T$. Now, we introduce the $𝔇_S(x)$ function that gives us the
order of the highest derivative of the variable $x$ in a given system $S$. So,
we have

\begin{align}
𝔇_P(x) &= 2 \\
𝔇_P(y) &= 2 \\
𝔇_P(T) &= 0.
\end{align}

and the stricture of the Jacobian of the system with respect to the unknowns
($x'', y'', T$) is

\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix}
\times & 0 & \times\\
0 & \times & \times\\
0 & 0 & 0\\
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align}

which is clearing singular. Hence, we know that $$ F(u'(t), u(t), p, t) = 0 $$
cannot possibly be solved by Newton method due to the structural singularity.
Thus, we want to introduce $x'', y''$, or $T$ into the last equation to make the
Jacobian have full rank structurally. Notice that the left hand side of the
equation is 0 for all $t$, so the derivative of the left hand side side also
equals to 0 for all $t$ and so does any higher order derivative. We can try to
differentiate the last equation until the unknowns appear. Differentiating it
twice we get

\begin{align}
2xx' + 2yy' &= 0 \\
2 x'^2+2 x x''+2 y'^2+2 y y'' &= 0.
\end{align}

Now, the structure of the Jacobian is
\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix}
\times & 0 & \times\\
0 & \times & \times\\
\times & \times & 0
\end{pmatrix}
\end{align}

Therefore, we can use Newton method to solve for the unknowns for the dynamics
on this system
\begin{align}
x'' - T x       &= 0\\
y'' - T y - g   &= 0\\
2 x'^2+2 x x''+2 y'^2+2 y y'' &= 0
\end{align}
We call DAE systems with fully ranked Jacobian like this an index 1 DAE. Since
we differentiated the last equation twice, the original system is index 3.
